[MUSIC PLAYING]
MAN: Sorry to break it to you.
Funny, you don't look Buddhist.
I used to think meditation
was for nice, happy people who
wanted to be nicer and
happier or something.
You have to be
dissatisfied with what
you're experiencing
in order to be
willing to try something else.
I'm Noah Levine, and I'm
a Buddhist meditation
teacher from the
Against the Stream
Buddhist Meditation Society.
And today, I'm going
to talk about Buddhist
meditation practice.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
And relaxing into
your body, releasing
any unnecessary tension,
softening your eyes, your face,
releasing the jaw and
shoulders, letting
go of any tension
in your stomach,
finding the place in your body
where you feel the breath.
So I grew up around
Buddhist meditators.
From a very young
age, I witnessed
my parents meditating.
But in my youth, I
dutifully rebelled
against all things
spiritual and found punk
rock music at a very young age.
And it spoke to the angst, and
energy, and dissatisfaction
that I felt with the world.
I started using drugs and
alcohol at a very young age
and started getting
in trouble, started
getting sent to juvenile
hall and getting
arrested for drugs and crime.
At 17 years old sitting in Santa
Cruz, California juvenile hall
where I had grown
up-- and I'd been
in and out of that juvenile
hall over and over many times
over the years-- and
at this last time,
the last time I was there,
something shifted for me.
I, for the first
time in my life took
responsibility for my actions.
Up to that point, all of the
suffering, all of the problems,
I blamed on society.
I blamed on the system,
the police, the hippies.
It was the hippies fault that
I was so angry or confused.
But there was a turning
point, where I was suicidal,
and I had had a suicide attempt.
And I woke up in
this padded room.
And I got a phone call from my
father who lives in New Mexico.
And I was in California.
And I was 17 years old.
And he said, maybe, you're
ready to try meditation,
Buddhist meditation.
And he gave me very simple
mindfulness of the breath
meditation instructions.
And at the time, I can remember
feeling desperate enough
to try anything, but
with a little bit
of an attitude of like,
well, you know, dad,
I need some real help.
How about a lawyer?
How about something
that will actually
get me out of the situation.
And he explained to me that
actually he was giving me
a tool that had the potential
to get me the freedom
that I sought, not
from the institution,
but from the suffering
that I was in.
I realized something
that I had never known up
until that time,
which was I don't have
to pay attention to my mind.
Up to that time,
my mind was saying
take drugs, and steal,
and lie, and cheat,
and violence, and all that.
And I was just
following my emotions
in my mind and all of the
suffering that was created.
And as I started to
practice mindfulness,
there was this revelation.
My mind doesn't have my
interest, my best interest,
my heart's best interest.
And then I have to
learn to ignore it.
And I have to learn
to disobey it.
And that was a
real turning point.
From there, first
couple of years,
I was locked up for
about nine months.
And then I got out.
And I was meditating.
And I would use meditation
occasionally, but not deeply,
not regularly.
I think I used
meditation the way
I think a lot of
people use prayer,
as a sort of in emergency only.
Like, oh, please get
me out of this one.
And, I think, I used
meditation like that.
I'd come back to
the breath when I
got stressed, when
I got afraid, when
I got some suffering arising.
A couple of years
later, at 19 years old,
I got myself into
some more trouble.
I got clean and sober.
I got off of drugs.
I became drug-free, got my
life together on some level.
I had an apartment, and
a car, and a motorcycle.
I was going to college.
But I still had this delusion,
what I now know as a delusion,
that the material world
would provide my happiness.
That if I got the car, if
I got the relationship,
if I got the stuff,
then I would be happy.
And I found myself
at 19 years old,
half-assed meditation practice,
miserable, and also in trouble
with the law.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Nonjudgmental awareness,
even when the mind wanders,
that's just what the mind does.
Your job is to come
back to the breath,
to connect and sustain awareness
with the present moment.
Right now, it's like
this, sitting, breathing.
Whatever sensations are
present in your body,
meeting them with kind,
accepting awareness.
So the police were after me.
I'd been stealing.
I was in a pseudo
kind of bike gang.
And that was the sort of
second turning point for me,
where I just realized
that the only thing that's
given me any sense of
satisfaction, any real hope
has been meditation.
And I haven't been
really applying
myself to the meditation.
And I have the relationship.
And I have the girlfriend.
And I have the
prestige, and the ego
trip of my adolescent
rebellion, but I'm miserable.
I'm stressed.
I'm afraid.
I'm anxious.
And that's when I really
committed in a more serious way
to Buddhist meditation practice.
Again, kind of reaching out
to my father, Stephen Levine,
who's a wonderful
teacher and is kind
of my first teacher and I said,
you know, where do I go next?
I know meditation is
where I need to go.
How do I take it
to the next level?
And he directed me into a
residential meditation retreat
with Jack Cornfield, who has
become one of my core teachers
for many, many years.
And I went and attended
this meditation retreat.
And, yeah, I had a
mixed experience.
It was difficult. And I looked
at all of the differences.
And it's all hippies.
And it's all my
parents' generation.
And there's no tattooed
punks in the room.
But the teaching, the Dharma,
the way that they were speaking
the truth about the
unsatisfactory nature of life
in the material
world, and how there
was the spiritual mindful
compassionate solution,
it just resonated in my heart.
And I knew this was
the path for me,
even though these were
not the people for me.
These were not--
it wasn't my tribe,
but the truth just
resonated so deeply.
And my life unfolded from there.
And I stayed involved
in the punk scene.
And at some point,
I sort of came out
and said, yes, I'm meditating.
And I'm exploring, you
know, yoga, and Hinduism,
and Buddhism, and Sufism.
And I'm exploring
this spiritual,
because it's giving me relief.
And some of my friends started
saying like, hey, Noah's less
of a jerk than he used to be.
Maybe there's something here,
some my recovery friends.
Recovery in the 12-step
program tells us to meditate,
but it doesn't really
tell us how to meditate.
So now a lot of my
recovery friends
are like, OK, let's check out
this Buddhist meditation stuff
that you're doing.
And Dharma Punks became
sort of our own label
for kind of inspired
by Jack Kerouac,
and The Beets, and those
early American rebel
spiritual rebellion.
But for us, we were kind of
Gen-X, punk rock generation,
at least our subculture.
And I was so
inspired by Kerouac,
that I just started calling
my crew the Dharma Punks.
And eventually, I
started teaching.
I actually ended up going
back into that same juvenile
hall where I had
been incarcerated
and learned meditation.
And I started going back in
and teaching the kids in there
how to be mindful and
how to do meditation
and started a
nonprofit that went
into the institution called the
Mind Body Awareness Project.
And 10 years into my practice,
my teacher Jack Cornfield said,
I want you to teach and come
work at Spirit Rock with us.
And so as I started teaching
Buddhism, I taught like that.
I said, like, this
was my suffering.
This is how the Dharma
Buddhist teachings
have transformed my life.
And this is what my
life is like now.
I got such a good response
from people of hearing
that, that that's when I
decided to write the first book,
to write Dharma Punks and
to put it down and say,
I know some people will
resonate with this.
And I wanted it to be
available on a broader scale.
And then Dharma Punks
started to really grow
into a kind of
anarchist collective,
if there is such a thing.
I think technically anarchists
can't be in collectives,
but it was a kind of do it
yourself Buddhist movement that
happened, where
people are starting
Dharma Punks groups
over, all of the country,
all over the world.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Friendly intention.
Watch the thoughts arise
and pass like the bubbles
in an open space.
There are plans.
Just name it,
planning, planning.
There are memories,
fantasies, judgments.
That's just what the mind does.
Have a kind of
relationship to this mind.
It's not your fault. It
should be clear to you
that you're not in control.
The mind has a mind of its own.
So I have several-- I've been
so inspired and so connected
to several different teachers
and several different lineages
through that.
My main teacher
is Jack Kornfield,
who came out of the
Thai forest tradition,
and then also his teaching
partner for many years,
Joseph Goldstein,
who was inspired
a bit more by the
Burmese school and came
out of the Mahasi Sayadaw
lineage of Burmese Buddhism.
So those two guys are kind
of the patriarchs in American
Buddhism, in my
mind, and have been
my teachers for many years.
Also Sharon Salzberg, who
was the original-- that
was the three of
them that really
set up kind of
insight meditation
in the United States.
So those three-- sounds
a little bit more
like a law firm then
Buddhism-- Goldstein, Salzburg,
and Cornfield,
they've been really
dear to my heart and dear
guides and teachers to me.
And then Ajahn Amaro is a
Buddhist monk in the Thai
forest tradition who I met very
early in my practice over 20,
probably almost
25 years ago now,
and he's been a
guide and a mentor
from the monastic
side of Buddhism
that has really guided me and
inspired me over the years.
I am primarily inspired
by Theravada Buddhism.
So it's Buddhism as currently
practiced in Sri Lanka, Burma,
Thailand, Southeast Asia.
Theravada Buddhism comes
from the "Pali Canon"
and the original, the
earliest recorded teachings
of Buddhism of the Buddha.
So I'm a little bit of
a fundamentalist, where
what I want to know is
what did the Buddha teach,
and how can I apply
that to my life?
And I'm not so interested
in religion and the way
that religion changes
original teachings.
That having been said being
primarily rooted in what would
be called Thervada
Buddhism, I'm an American
who I go see the Dalai Lama.
I study with Tibetan
teachers, with Zen teachers.
I'm not pretending to
be a Thai Buddhist.
I am a westerner who is
engaging in the teachings
and experiencing them directly.
And, I think, that just as
Buddhism travelled from India
all over Asia, it's been
established here in the West
for long enough for
us to-- my opinion,
is to stop practicing
Tibetan Buddhism,
stop practicing
Thai Buddhism, stop
practicing Japanese Buddhism.
And for us in the West to say,
we actually have the teachings.
And we don't have to keep
looking to ancient cultures--
which have problems in the kind
of religious manifestations--
and establish a new tradition--
which is Buddhism in the West
or American
Buddhism-- rather than
pretending like we're Tibetan or
pretending like we're Japanese.
I don't say anything to
people who aren't interested.
I believe that what
the Buddha taught
was an open offering for
those who are seeking.
And those who aren't seeking,
no need to try to convert
or to talk people into it.
That spiritual practice,
meditation practice
is for those who want it.
And we all want it
for different reasons.
I have a very
extreme story of what
brought me to a real
bottom, real consequences
of my actions.
But it's not like that.
I've been teaching
for many years.
And the room is
full of people who
are there just because
there's dissatisfaction.
There's stress.
There's grief.
There's unattended sorrow.
And they come for whatever
motivation, to seek happiness,
to seek peace.
And there's all different
levels of suffering.
And I think that there's
no hierarchy of suffering.
Whether it's extreme or it's
light, suffering is suffering.
And meditation and Buddhist
meditation, the way that Buddha
talked, was over and over
he'd say, I only teach
the truth of
suffering, how we all
have some suffering
in our lives,
and I teach the path
to end that suffering.
And so whether it's
an extreme suffering
or it's a less extreme,
if you want to be free,
then meditations for you.
If you're happy,
then, of course,
you're probably not
going to meditate.
But you're probably
also not watching
this show if you're happy.
The Buddha once said, we could
search the entire universe
and never find anyone more
worthy of our love and kindness
then ourselves.
We have to start from the inside
in order to genuinely love.
We must learn to love ourselves.
May I be at ease.
May all beings be at ease.
May I be free from suffering.
May all beings be
free from suffering.
[MUSIC PLAYING]